You will most likely want to have your login page as
part of your single‑page application.
You might want to have it on your landing page or if
the user is not yet authenticated.
Here in our React demo application, I have included it on the landing page.
Now the simplest way to achieve this if you're authenticating with only the
username and password is to use basic authentication.
Now let's take a look at the security configuration
required to make this happen.
We still enable cookie‑based cross‑site request forgery protection.
Now previously we relied on Spring Security to render the login page,
hence, all the endpoints required authentication,
including the index.html page.
However, now since our login page is in the React application,
we have to allow the index.html page and also the portfolio path
to be accessed without authentication so that our React
application can load in the user's browser and prompt them for
their credentials with the login page.
Now when the React app loads in the user's browser,
it won't know if this session on the server is authenticated,
and if login is required.
What you can do is create a RestController with an endpoint which returns
the principal object or some information about the user.
Then our React application can call this endpoint,
and if it receives a 200 response code and the user information back,
it knows that the user is authenticated,
and now it also has some data about them,
like they're name, which they can use to perhaps display on the page somewhere.
If, however, it gets an unauthorized error back,
it can then prompt the user to authenticate.
Now we can authenticate with Spring Security by simply including a
basic authorization header with the username:password Base64
encoded in a request to this endpoint.
This will be intercepted by the basic authentication filter,
which will authenticate the user.
For the logout,
we no longer have to reload the page in our single‑page application,
as it now renders its own login page,
so we can simply have Spring Security redirect the user back
to the landing page on successful logout.
If we restart our application, hmm, nothing is loading.
If we look at the Network tab in our browser,
you can see the index.html page was loaded,
and it then requested the js bundle files from the web server,
but Spring Security blocked them, as by default we have it blocking everything,
apart from the index and /portfolio.
Hence, we need Spring Security to ignore the js folder.
We can achieve this via the WebSecurity builder.
There, much better, the user can now log in.
You can see the React app sends the basic authentication header,
and then all subsequent Ajax requests to Spring only need
to include the cookie to authenticate, and the browser does this for you.
Nice and simple.
If we log out, and log in with an invalid password,
you can see the browser pops up the basic authentication login.
It did this because the basic authentication entry point returned
an unauthorized with a WWW‑Authenticate header.
The browser sees this and automatically prompts the user for their credentials,
but we don't want that.
We want our single‑page application to prompt them for their credentials,
hence,
we can add our own authentication entry point to return
an unauthorized 401 header instead.
There, all done.
Now, basic authentication works really well,
but perhaps you need to include some additional information in your
login requests other than the username and password.
Hence, you might want to use formLogin.
Now to achieve this, the security configuration will look very similar,
apart from the formLogin builder where we also provide the loginProcessingUrl.
And we no longer need a custom entry point.
This is the endpoint our single‑page application submits
the user credentials for authentication.
Now,
the main difference in our React demo app is that this time
the login request is to an MVC endpoint,
so a POST with form‑data, not REST JSON data.
You can see the Content‑Type is form‑data,
and we're including the username and password in the body of the request.
That's it.
This time the username and password authentication filter
will intercept the authentication request,
extract the credentials, and authenticate the user.
Nice and simple.
Next,
let's wrap up and discuss where you can go for more information about more
advanced topics for single‑page application security, like using stateless services, JWTs, and OAuth.